FAO / INFOODS Guidelines
Guidelines for Checking Food
Composition Data prior to the publication
of a Table/Database - Version 1.0

FAO/INFOODS
Guidelines
for Checking Food Composition Data
prior to the Publication of a User
Table/Database
Version 1.0

Prepared by:

U. Ruth Charrondiere, Barbara Stadlmayr, David Haytowitz, Marine Oseredczuk, Jayne Ireland,
Petro Wolmarans, Doris Rittenschober, Barbara Selley, Prapasri Puwastien, Ólafur Reykdal, Adriana
Blanco, Aida Aguinaldo, Henrietta Ene-Obong, Pamela Pehrsson, Christiant Pascal Kouebou, T.
Longvah, Kamda Silapeux Aristide Guillaume, Catherine Champagne, Verena Nowak, Ramani
Wijesena-Bettoni
Cite as:
FAO/INFOODS (2012). FAO/INFOODS Guidelines for Checking Food Composition Data prior
to the Publication of a User Table/Database-Version 1.0. FAO, Rome.

FAO, Rome 2012

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this
information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever
on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city
or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries. The mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers,
whether or not these have been patented, does not imply that these have
been endorsed or recommended by FAO in preference to others of a similar
nature that are not mentioned.
The views expressed in this information product are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of FAO.

E-ISBN 978-92-5-107368-1 (PDF)

All rights reserved. FAO encourages reproduction and dissemination of
material in this information product. Non-commercial uses will be authorized
free of charge, upon request. Reproduction for resale or other commercial
purposes, including educational purposes, may incur fees. Applications for
permission to reproduce or disseminate FAO copyright materials, and all
queries concerning rights and licences, should be addressed by e-mail to
copyright@fao.org or to the Chief, Publishing Policy and Support Branch,
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension, FAO,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy.

© FAO 2012

Table of contents
Acknowledgement ....................................................................................................................... iii
List of abbreviations and symbols ............................................................................................... iv
1. Background and objectives .......................................................................................................1
2. General food composition issues...............................................................................................2
2.1 Food identification ..............................................................................................................2
2.1.1 Food names and description of foods ...........................................................................3
2.1.2 Food groups ..................................................................................................................3
2.1.3 Food codes....................................................................................................................4
2.2 Component nomenclature, conventions and expressions ....................................................4
2.2.1 Component identifiers ..................................................................................................5
2.2.2 Component conventions and expressions ....................................................................6
2.2.3 Extent and treatment of missing values........................................................................7
2.2.4 Component selection ....................................................................................................7
2.3 Recipes ................................................................................................................................7
2.4 Documentation of user tables/DBs ......................................................................................8
2.4.1 Introduction/general documentation ............................................................................8
2.4.2 Documentation in the user table/DB ............................................................................9
2.4.3 Food Index and Reference list ......................................................................................9
2.5 Food Composition Database Management Systems (FCDBMS) .......................................9
3. Checks .....................................................................................................................................11
3.1 Checks on food identification ...........................................................................................11
3.2 Checks on components ......................................................................................................13
3.3 Checks on recipes ..............................................................................................................23
3.4 Checks on data documentation ..........................................................................................24
Annex 1 Extract of food components, recommended units and INFOODS tagnames ................26
Annex 2 Units, significant figures and maximum decimal places ...............................................36
Annex 3 Conversion factors.........................................................................................................37
References ...................................................................................................................................41

ii

Acknowledgement
We are grateful for the helpful comments of Hei Mei, Josephine Deeks, Robert Fungo, Josefa Rubio
Mañas, Achu Mercy Bih Loh, Norma Samman, Peju Olapeju, Serge Nzali, Hettie Schönfeldt, Victor
N. Enujiugha, Yasmine Probst, Marie Modestine Kana Sop, Harriet Kuhnlein.
We thank Kristy Ebanks for the design of the cover and Ruth Charrondiere for providing the
pictures.

iii

List of abbreviations and symbols

Abbreviations
DB
DM
EP
FAO
FCDB
FCDBMS
g
INFOODS
kcal
kJ
mcg
mg
mL
NV
RF
SD
SE
YF

Database
Dry matter
Edible portion on fresh weight basis
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Food composition database
Food composition database management system
gram
International Network of Food Data Systems
kilocalories
kilojoules
microgram
milligram
milliliter
Nutrient value
Nutrient retention factor
Standard deviation
Standard error
Yield factor

Symbols
<
>
≥
=
≈
+
∑

%

less than
less than or equal to
greater than
greater than or equal to
equal to
approximately equal to
plus
minus
sum
percentage

iv

1. Background and objectives
Food composition data play an essential role in many sectors, including nutrition, health, agriculture,
environment, food labelling and trade (Burlingame, 2004; Greenfield and Southgate, 2003;
Pennington, 2008). Over the last 25 years, INFOODS has developed many international standards,
guidelines and tools to obtain harmonized food composition data. They contain criteria for
analytical data, guidelines on component identifiers, data compilation, food nomenclature,
interchange and quality evaluation (; INFOODS, 2012a; Greenfield and Southgate, 2003; Klensin et
al., 1989; Rand et al., 1991; Truswell et al., 1991). They were supplemented by guidelines from others
such as EuroFIR (EuroFIR, 2012a; Westenbrink et al., 2009). However, as there are no guidelines on
the validation/verification of data prior to publishing them in a user table/database (DB), INFOODS
and FAO decided to develop such guidelines through the INFOODS network.
The document was constructed on the assumption that the user table/DB was developed according
to the criteria set by Greenfield and Southgate (2003, pp.14-15) as outlined in Figure 1. It reflects the
different stages of food composition database management until the production of user tables/DBs.
Checks should be performed at all levels of the food composition database (FCDB) and a final check
is recommended before the release of a user table/DB. The checks described in this document are
related to compiled/aggregated data before publication in user tables/DBs.

Data flow in food composition database
Data source

Collection of data (paper, electronic)

Evaluate data against a set of criteria and assign quality
Archival database
Original data

Reference database

Enter assembled data in archival DB incl.
own analytical data
Aggregation, calculation, estimation,
comparison, evaluation, completion of
missing data

Selection of foods and components for user database
User database

Publish concise or comprehensive
30
user database or table – printed, electronic

Figure 1. Different stages in food composition data DB management (Charrondiere, 2012a)
The objective of this document is to outline comprehensively the internal checks to be carried out on
the food composition data and documentation prior their publication in the user table/DB (section
3). For those compilers not yet familiar with the compilation and publication procedures of food
composition data, a section on general issues (section 2) was added to give a brief overview of
important issues which are useful for a better understanding of the checks and for keeping the checks
as short as possible, i.e. without the need for further explanations. Experienced compilers will
probably not need to go through section 2 and are invited to go immediately to section 3, checks.

1

Additional information is found in the annexes which provide further useful information for those
with less experience in database compilation.
The development of the guidelines started in 2011 and took about one year of consultation over email to finalize the document. The proposed checks are based on the available literature (see
reference list) and the experience of various compilers. These checks should at least be carried out at
the end of the compilation process (i.e. prior to publishing in user table/DB) but many of them
should already have been applied at all compilation steps (e.g. data entry, reference DB). This
document is a “work in progress” which will be progressively extended and updated.

2. General food composition issues
This section reviews the most important aspects of general food composition issues including
information on food identification, component nomenclature, recipes, documentation, food
composition database management systems (FCDBMS) and issues related to user tables and DBs. For
more information on these general aspects see Charrondiere et al. (2011ab) and Greenfield and
Southgate (2003). This section is mainly targeted for less experienced compilers.More experienced
compilers can skip this section and go immediately to section 3; p. 11.
User table/DB
Throughout the document, a distinction is made between a user table and database (DB), both
being the end product of a compilation process which involves various levels of data and activities
described in Figure 1 (p. 1). In general, the user table/DB is a subset of the reference DB. The main
difference between a user table and DB is that the tables are 2 dimensional and often in printed
formats (e.g. PDF) and the DBs are multi-dimensional in electronic format (e.g. Microsoft Access).
Electronic forms are preferable to printed tables as they allow capturing a higher volume of data. In
addition, they are easier to update and can reach wider distribution if they are made publicly
available on the internet. They also enable programming personnel to incorporate the data into
software programs allowing for easier nutrient analysis of dietary assessment instruments, such as
food records kept by study participants. In some countries, however, e.g. developing countries,
printed tables are important and often the best way for distribution (Charrondiere et al., 2011ab,
Module 9; Charrondiere, 2012c).
Different formats exist according to user´s needs, including:
Comprehensive user DB which includes many foods, components and metadata
Abbreviated/abridged user table/DB which represents a smaller set of foods and components,
usually without metadata but general documentation
Special user table/DB which covers specific components
Complete user DB which is used for nutrient intake assessment and does not have any missing
values

2.1 Food identification
Food identification includes food naming, food description, food classification and food coding.
Accurate food names and descriptions of foods are mandatory because, without them, the food
cannot be identified correctly. Food codes or food identification numbers are mandatory and critical
in the different levels of a food composition database (FCDB) and are highly recommended to be

2

published in user tables/DBs. Food groups are optional but are useful e.g. for users to identify and
retrieve foods in the user table/DB.
2.1.1 Food names and description of foods
Food name and descriptors should be comprehensive enough to allow for an unambiguous
identification of the food and should include all characteristics that influence the nutrient contents.
Two nutrients are important to check the food description: water for all foods and fat for foods
where fat can vary substantially (e.g. meat, cheese, milk products).
Characteristics that influence the nutrient content of foods include:
Processing and preparation state
Colour
Maturity stage
Part/source of the food
Fortification/enrichment level
Reduction of components (e.g. sodium, sugar for `light foods`)
Biodiversity (different varieties, cultivars, breeds)
Wild versus domesticated plants and animals
Edible portion/refuse (even though edible portion considered as part of the food description, it is
included in checks for components because in INFOODS, edible portion is treated as a
component)
It may be necessary to provide two or more entries for a single food in a user table/DB, where
differences in composition are sufficient to justify separate food records, e.g. for different
varieties/cultivars, fortified and unfortified food, etc. See also the FAO/INFOODS Guidelines for
Food Matching (FAO/INFOODS, 2011).
Sets of recommendations on food nomenclature exist. Many of them are national or regional and are
based on standards (e.g. Codex Alimentarius), legislation and traditions. Descriptive terms can be
included in the food name or provided in separate fields. Food description in separate fields should
follow one of the two internationally recognised food description systems: INFOODS Guidelines
for Describing Foods (Truswell et al., 1991) and LanguaL, the International Framework for Food
Description (LanguaL, 2012). The INFOODS Food Description System uses free text in a faceted
description, whereas LanguaL uses standardized vocabulary from a faceted, language-independent
thesaurus (Pennington, 1996). An example of INFOODS facetted food description can be seen in the
online New Zealand database (http://www.foodcomposition.co.nz), and examples of LanguaL food
indexing can be downloaded from the LanguaL site (http://www.langual.org).
Scientific names are essential for identifying the food more precisely and are particularly relevant for
international interchange and use. To verify scientific names, authoritative sources should be
consulted; links to many of these are available through SciName Finder (http://www.sciname.info/).
2.1.2 Food groups
No international agreement exists on a common food grouping in general nor specifically for food
composition. Food grouping/classifications are purpose driven and therefore, many food
classifications exist for different purposes/objectives (Ireland and Møller 2000) e.g. CIAA Food
Categorization System for Food Additives, Codex Alimentarius Classification of Food and Feed
Commodities.

3

However, food grouping for food composition is not as important as for other purposes, as foods are
easily found through the food index, even if they are listed in different food groups among countries
and regions. In some user tables/DBs, food groups are merged when only a few foods of several food
groups are included (e.g. ‘Meat, poultry, fish and their products’). Moreover, countries often add
specific food groups to reflect the level of importance of certain foods within their country (e.g. food
group ‘Coconut products’ in the South Pacific region). Many user tables/DBs also use subgroups, e.g.
‘Grains and flour’, ‘Breads’, ‘Pasta’, ‘Prepared foods’, ‘Tortillas’, ‘Cakes’, ‘Dough’, and ‘Breakfast
cereals’ under ‘Cereals and their products’. Some examples of commonly used food groups in user
tables/DBs can be found in Greenfield and Southgate (2003, pp. 36-39) or Charrondiere et al.,
(2011ab, Module 3). Some of these examples are shown below:
Examples of food groups
Cereals and cereal products
Starchy roots and tubers and their products
Legumes and their products
Vegetables and their products
Fruits and their products
Nuts and their products
Sugar, sweets and syrup
Meat and poultry and their products
Eggs and their products
Fish and their products
Milk and their products
Fat and oils
Beverages
Miscellaneous
Examples of additional food groups
Insects and wild animals and their products
Coconut and their products e.g. in the South Pacific region
2.1.3 Food codes
Every food in a user table/DB must have a unique food code, which should be the same at all levels
of the FCDB (e.g. archival, reference and user table/DB). This allows tracing the data throughout the
FCDB. Food codes can be simple sequential numbers, or else composite codes, comprised of a food
group identifier (and possibly subgroup identifier) and a unique identifier within the food group (e.g.
“A0001”, “0101001”) (Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module 3).
If a sequential food coding system is specially created for a user table/DB, a correspondence table
needs to be prepared between the food codes in the FCDB and in the user table/DB linking the food
code between the various tables, To assist users, foods should be listed alphabetically within each
food group in a user table. In a user DB, foods can be sorted on food group, food name and/or food
code

2.2 Component nomenclature, conventions and expressions
This section includes information on the importance of unambiguous food component
identification. An extract of food components with recommended units and INFOODS tagnames as
well as EuroFIR component identifiers is given in Annex 1 (p. 26) . In addition, this section and the

4

Annexes 2 (p. 36) and 3 (p. 37) cover information on data expressions (e.g. units, denominators,
significant figures, maximum decimal places) and conversion factors. For more information see
Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 4 b and c) and Greenfield and Southgate (2003, pp.79-147; 163170; 179-181).
2.2.1 Component identifiers
The effective use of food composition data requires precise identification of the components.
Common component names (e.g. vitamin A or carbohydrates) are often not sufficiently precise to
identify components unambiguously. Many food components informally have the same name but
vary because of differences in:
expression (e.g. carbohydrates available: expressed in monosaccharide equivalents vs. by weight),
definition (e.g. vitamin A: retinol activity equivalents vs. retinol equivalents) or
analytical methods resulting in different values (e.g. fibre: AOAC-Prosky dietary vs. crude)
Therefore, standardized systems of component identification are important in order to identify
unambiguously components, units and methods, to document the data in the same way across
countries, and to interchange data unambiguously.
Different systems of component identifications exist. For use in FCDBs, the two widely used systems
are:
INFOODS food components identifiers also called Tagnames (INFOODS, 2012b, Klensin et
al., 1989). Tagnames are abbreviated food component identifiers that make the unambiguous
identification of all food components possible, to the extent the method of analysis allows.
Information on methods, expression (e.g. carbohydrates available: expressed in monosaccharide
equivalents vs. by weight) and definition (e.g. vitamin A: retinol activity equivalents vs. retinol
equivalents) is included in the tagname. This comprehensive system allows a practical use of the
INFOODS tagnames also in simple FCDBMS (such as the FAO/INFOODS Compilation Tool
in Excel). Component values with the same tagname are comparable, whereas those with
different tagnames are not. An extract of food components, recommended units and INFOODS
tagnames is given in Annex 1 (p. 26). Originally, the unit and denominator were part of the
tagnames but were separated in 2003 and are now listed as recommended units.
EuroFIR component identifiers (EuroFIR, 2012b). EuroFIR component identifiers are based
on INFOODS food component identifiers. The EuroFIR system for components can be
regarded as a description system with thesauri and descriptors. In the EuroFIR component
identification system, information on component identity, method and data expression is
reported in separate fields. This means before knowing which components values can be
aggregated different fields need to be consulted: the fields for component identifier, method,
expression and unit (see Annex 1; p. 26).
Components used in the user table/DB should be documented, including the food component
identifiers, methods of analysis and unit of the single components. It is also important to document
the conversion factors that were used for calculated components in the documentation of the user
table/DB, and if possible also at value level (see also 2.4 Documentation, in the current document).
Note:
Values of different INFOODS tagnames cannot be compared or combined directly, because different
analytical methods, definitions or expressions for these components yield significantly different
values. When aggregating data in the reference DB it is important to combine only those values

5

which have the same tagname and keywords. Example: Among all dietary fibre definitions, the
compiler decides that values for total dietary fibre (Prosky method) (FIBTG) will be displayed in the
user table/DB. When calculating the mean/median for one food item from different data source, one
has to excludeundesired fibre expressions (crude fibre (FIBC) and other dietary fibre definitions)
when calculating the average for total dietary fibre (FIBTG).
When the INFOODS component identifier system is used, the recommendation is to list all relevant
taganmes for the different components in the archival and reference DB and to add a field
`standardized nutrients` in the reference DB, which will contain the selected value to be published in
the user table/DB.
2.2.2 Component conventions and expressions
Units and denominators
Each compositional value is defined by a unit (how much of the specific component) and a
denominator (in how much of a given quantity of foodstuff). The most common basis to present
food composition data in a FCDB is per 100 g edible portion on fresh weight basis (EP), also for
beverages (and not per 100 mL) - see also section below.
Significant figures and maximal decimal places
Data should not give a false impression of preciseness/accuracy. The last digit in the values should
reflect the precision of the analysis. Significant figures are different from decimal places in a value.
Example: 123, 12.3, 0.123 have all three significant figures, even though they have different numbers
of decimal places. In the user table/DB the number of significant figures and maximal number of
decimal places for each nutrient should be established. This will either require programming in a
sophisticated FCDBMS for the output format of the user table/DB, or it needs to be done manually
(in e.g. Microsoft Excel) as this application does not have this capability built-in to their formats.
Regarding decimal places, no decimal places should be added but values with higher decimal places
should be truncated to maximal number of decimal places (Greenfield and Southgate, 2003, pp.163166; Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module 4c).
In most cases, three significant figures are the maximum required in a user table/DB. A table
presenting the most widely used units, significant figures and maximal decimal places of food
composition values in user tables/DBs is given in Annex 2 (p. 36)
Rounding procedures
Where values are being summed for statistical purposes, the conventional rounding rules are
appropriate (0-4: round down and 6-9: round up), with even values in front of 5 being rounded down
(e.g. 0.25 becomes 0.2) and uneven numbers in front rounded up (e.g. 0.55 becomes 0.6) to avoid
significant bias. (Greenfield and Southgate, 2003, pp.163-166; Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module
4c).
Conversion factors
Conversion factors are used to convert a quantity expressed in one set of units to another set of units,
or to account for different nutrient activities. It is advisable to avoid copying calculated values from
other sources (e.g. energy or vitamin equivalents). These values should always be calculated in one’s
own DB based on the contributing values and the definition chosen. The use of data from other
sources cannot assure that the value is really calculated according to the definition except when all
contributing values and their conversion factors are listed and a recalculation is possible
(Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module 4bc).

6

Energy and nitrogen to protein conversion factors are given in Annex 3 (p. 37). Conversion factors
for vitamin A, vitamin E, vitamin D equivalents, folate equivalents and niacin equivalents are part of
the component definition in INFOODS tagnames and are therefore included in Annex 1 (p. 26).
When using EuroFIR component identifiers conversion factors should be documented in the
appropriate method fields. For more information on conversions see the FAO/INFOODS
Guidelines on conversions among different units, denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS,
2012a).
Liquid foods
Liquid foods are frequently measured by volume and expressed per 100 g or 100 mL. However, in a
user DB, in order to avoid confusion and errors, it is recommended that data for liquids also be
expressed per 100 g. It is desirable to present density data of the liquid foods in order to allow
appropriate conversion from mL to g and vice versa. For reference of density data see e.g. the
FAO/INFOODS Density Database version 2 (FAO/INFOODS, 2012b) and the FAO/INFOODS
Guidelines on Conversion among different units, denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS,
2012a).
2.2.3 Extent and treatment of missing values
The aim is to have no missing values, or as few gaps as possible, because missing values lead to a bias
of nutrient intake estimations. Missing values for foods, which are also ingredients of recipes, are
especially critical as they lower the calculated nutrient values of the recipe. Methods to estimate
missing nutrient values are provided by Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 8), Schakel et al. (1997)
and Greenfield and Southgate (2003, p.7-9).
2.2.4 Component selection
The minimal components suggested in a user table/DB are energy, water, fat, protein, carbohydrates,
alcohol1, dietary fibre and ash if, carbohydrates are calculated by difference (Greenfield and
Southgate, 2003). They are often listed together with nutrients of public health importance. Some
user tables/DBs include over 100 components and list amino and fatty acids or phytochemicals.

2.3 Recipes
The nutrient values of recipes can be obtained through analysis or through calculations. The
calculation of recipes is a cost-effective and good alternative to analysis, if the calculation is
undertaken correctly. For recipe calculations, yield factors (YF) and nutrient retention factors (RF)
must be applied.
Yield factors (YF) are the percentage weight change in foods or recipes due to cooking.
Nutrient retention factors (RF) are the percentage preservation of nutrients, especially of
vitamins and minerals, in a food or dish after storage, preparation, processing, holding warm or
reheating.
YF and RF can be obtained in different ways: (1) weighting or analysing of the food/recipe before
and after cooking, (2) calculating the YF of a recipe based on the YFs of its ingredients, or (3) by
copying YF and RF from the literature. References for YF and RF include Bergström (1994); Bognár

1

If only few alcoholic beverages are present in the user table/DB the alcohol content can be part of the food name but, the
values need to be included in the calculation of energy and carbohydrates calculated by difference

7

(2002); EuroFIR (2012d); Food Standards Agency (2002); Murphy et al. (1975); USDA (2007); USDA
(1975).
Different types of recipe calculation systems exist. They differ if and where yield factors (YF) and
nutrient retention factors (RF) are applied (Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module 8):
Ingredient method, i.e. YF and RF are applied at ingredient level
Recipe method, i.e. YF and RF are applied at recipe level
Mixed method, i.e. YF is applied at recipe level and RF at ingredient level
Raw ingredient method: i.e. summing nutrient values of raw ingredients without applying any
factors (not recommended except for raw dishes, e.g. fruit salad, sandwiches)
Note:
It is better to calculate nutrient values of foods with high YF (e.g. boiled rice) by adding the
ingredient + water in the recipe calculation, in order to take the nutrient values of water into
account, instead of applying the YF to the food. Moreover, it is preferable to use salt in the recipe
calculation (e.g. boiled potatoes with salt) especially as salt intake is becoming more and more an
issue in non-communicable diseases. If not, the salt intake is underestimated.
Recipes may be named differently within countries even if they contain the same ingredients; or
recipes may have the same name but contain different ingredients depending on the region. A
solution to this would be to add the varying ingredients and/or region to the recipe name (and
probably the synonym name). For more information on recipe calculation see Charrondiere et al.
(2011ab, Module 8).

2.4 Documentation of user tables/DBs

Documentation is essential for data quality and data evaluation. Documentation should be
comprehensive and complete. There are three parts of data documentation. The first part describes
the overall DB which is usually handled in the introduction or the general documentation of the user
table/DB. The second part refers to the documentation at value and/or food level in the table/DB as
such. The third part comprises the food index and the reference list.
If the primary language of the user table/DB is not English it is advisable to publish the general
documentation and the index of food names in English, to facilitate international usage.
2.4.1 Introduction/general documentation
The introduction/general documentation of the user table/DB should include all essential
information for users. It should include information on the total number of foods, the total number
of components included, as well as the version number and year of the edition. Moreover, significant
differences compared to the previous version should be reported. It is essential to provide
information on food identification (see also section 2.1); component nomenclature (see also section
2.2) and recipes (see also section 2.3). It is also recommended to explain the method of compilation
and possibly to indicate which food composition database management system was used (see also
section 2.5). The documentation for a user DB must include files formats and descriptions of all
tables and fields.
If relevant, information on the quality of the data and data evaluation should be documented.
Quality assessment systems have been developed by EuroFIR (EuroFIR, 2009; Westenbrink et al.,
2009) and USDA (Holden et al., 2002; Haytowitz, et al., 2009) including specific questions to make a

8

standardized and objective data assessment possible. For more general information on quality
considerations see Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 11) and Greenfield and Southgate (2003, pp.
171-186).
2.4.2 Documentation in the user table/DB
Where possible, values should be documented with metadata in the user table/DB (e.g. numbers of
food samples analyzed, the analytical methods used, sampling plan and any quality assurance
procedures in place). However, these metadata are often only recorded in the unpublished reference
database. Such documentation in the reference database should avoid the need to refer back to the
original data sources if queries arise and would allow revision of quality assessment if their criteria
evolve over time. Methods of analysis and calculation, sampling procedures and literature sources
should be documented at value level in the user table/DB so the user can perform an independent
evaluation or comparison with other data sources. Only documentation at the value level allows
users to know the analytical method and/or definition for each value. If documentation at the value
level is not possible, at least documentation should be given at the component level (e.g. usual
analytical or calculation method) and/or on food level (e.g. whether food was borrowed, is a recipe
or was analysed). For more information see Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 10).
2.4.3 Food Index and Reference list
Food index
The food index is only needed in user tables. It should include the food name in alphabetic order in
the national language/languages (if several exist), the scientific name, food code, and page number. If
different languages are used, there should be as many indexes as languages.
Reference list
The Reference List includes bibliographic references to sources of data, recipes and methods that are
cited in the user table/DB. Data sources should ideally be documented at value level, or at least at
food level. In both cases the entire bibliographic references should be reported in the reference list of
the user table/DB, and it should be possible to cross check the single nutrient values or food entries
with their references. Consistent reference style should be used in the Reference List. Protection of
confidential data sources should be ensured (e.g. data obtained from an industry that does not want
to give their exact source).

2.5 Food Composition Database Management Systems (FCDBMS)

As documentation is fundamental for food composition, the food composition database management
system (FCDBMS) should be capable to handle this task. The use of computerized FCDBMS allows
the compiler to store, document and manage large volumes of food composition data in a
standardized way, and to extract food composition data for publication in a user table/DB.
Many FCDBMS have been developed by national compilers, for example in the US (USDA, 2011)
and in Europe (EuroFIR, 2012c). However, the development of national FCDBMS software is
expensive, and many countries, in particular developing countries, lack the necessary financial
resources for software development. Therefore, FAO/INFOODS developed the first publicly
available compilation tool using internationally recognized standards and guidelines, allowing
standardized compilation, documentation and management of food composition data (Charrondiere
and Burlingame, 2011). The FAO/INFOODS Compilation tool in Microsoft Excel format is
available at the INFOODS webpage (http://www.fao.org/infoods/software_en.stm), free of charge.
For more information on Food composition database management systems and data interchange, see

9

Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 9). In addition to this tool, there are some ongoing projects to
develop FCBDMS for compilers, following EuroFIR standards (FoodCase, 2012).
The FAO/INFOODS Compilation tool in excel format is available at the INFOODS webpage, free
of charge http://www.fao.org/infoods/software_en.stm. For more information on Food
composition database management systems and data interchange, see Charrondiere et al. (2011ab,
Module 9).
The FCDBMS determines which data management, documentation, quality assessment and checks
can be carried out on the data and at which level (general, food, component and/or value level) and if
they can be programmed and/or run automatically or manually. For example, a FCDBMS managing
a relational database would automatically avoid double entries for food codes, food names, and food
group codes or names. In Excel these checks need to be done manually. The choice of the FCDBMS
and its capacities therefore has implications for checks that need to be done manually or
automatically, but even with a sophisticated system, checks have to be defined and programmed in
the application (e.g. if done on value, food, component level or throughout the database). Therefore,
the list of checks in section 3 (p. 11) is useful for all FCDBMS. It should be noted that a FCDBMS is
only a tool and that different FCDBMS following the same compilation method and using the same
original data should give exactly the same results.

10

3. Checks
As mentioned earlier, the data checks as outlined in this document are targeted mainly to the final
step of compilation, e.g. prior to publication of the user table/DB. At this stage, the compiler needs
to assure that all data checks have been carried out systematically throughout the whole compilation
process, while other checks are only relevant for this final stage. The document will not explain in
detail at which level of the compilation process the listed checks are relevant but it is understood that
many checks are often relevant also at earlier stages of the compilation process (data entry, archival
database and reference database – see figure 1 at page1).
All data in the user table/DB should be checked for accuracy, consistency and completeness
including checks on food identification, components, recipes and data documentation. Checks can be
done on foods, on food groups, on components, and on metadata. The preparation of a user
table/DB may require returning to the reference DB and/or to the archival DB (original data) when
inconsistencies are discovered in the user table/DB. It is recommended that all data, especially those
entered manually, be cross-checked by a second compiler and/or submitted to computerized
validation tests.
It is good practice to define and apply traceable procedures for validation. Ideally these should be
computerized so that validation can be performed on the entire dataset or on a subset of data (for
cross checking of correct manual data entry, for example). It is also advisable to establish an internal
coding system to track checks that have been carried out per food, food group, component, or for
the entire DB and flag matters for follow-up. The indication at these different levels could help the
compiler to see which tasks still need to be completed before the user table/DB can be published. An
example of a coding system (progress codes) that can be carried out in Microsoft Excel, for example,
can
be
seen
in
the
FAO/INFOODS
Compilation
Tool,
version
1.2.1
(http://www.fao.org/infoods/software_en.stm).
Consistency checks, however, should be carried out with an awareness of the natural variability in
foods, so unusual data are not automatically excluded (Rand et al., 1991). Aspects such as differences
in genetics e.g. variety/cultivars/breeds and differences, due to geography and environmental
phenomena need to be carefully validated (Burlingame, 2004).
The checks in this document are divided in the following sections:
3.1 Checks on food identification
3.2 Checks on components
3.3 Checks on recipes
3.4 Checks on data documentation

3.1 Checks on food identification

Precise and comprehensive food nomenclature is important to identify foods correctly. Checks
should be carried out on food name and description, on food groups and on food codes. In the
following, two examples are given demonstrating characteristics essential to unambiguous food
description.
Table 1. Checks on food identification
Food identification

11

Food name
and
description

Food

Food name and description should be complete and unambiguous
It is important to check that:
The processing and preparation state of the food is specified in the food name
o
Is the food raw, fresh, dried, processed or prepared?
o
How is the food cooked?
 Is it boiled, baked, micro-waved, fried, etc.?
o
Is the visible fat (meat) removed?
o
Is the peel/skin (vegetables/fruits/fish) removed?
o
Is the food salted?
o
Which oil/fat was used for frying?
o
Is the food canned/preserved in syrup, juice, brine, or oil?
o
What is the fat content of the food? (e.g. milk can be whole, partially skimmed,
or skimmed; meat: can be lean, medium fat, or fatty)
The colour of the food is specified if it effects composition
o
What is the colour of the food? This can be important for some vegetables and
fruits
o
What is the intensity of the colour? E.g. is it dark green or pale green?
The maturity stage is specified
o
Is the food ripe or unripe (e.g. mango, tomato)?
o
Is it an immature or mature form (e.g. beans)?
o
What is the age of the animal (e.g. veal versus beef)?
The part/source of the food is specified
o
Which source of the animal/plant does the food entry represent? For meat
specify: e.g. chicken, beef, mutton. For milk, specify: e.g. milk from cow, goat,
buffalo.
o
Which meat cut? For meat e.g. chop, fillet, leg
o
Was the food farmed or wild? Is it a product of conventional or organic
cultivation?
Fortification/enrichment is specified, if applicable
o
Is the food fortified/enriched?
o
With what is the food fortified/enriched?
o
To which levels are components added? E.g. 25% of the recommended daily
intake value, or exact amount.
o
Is the food imported from a country where the food is generally
fortified/enriched?
The relationship between the food description and the nutrient values makes sense.
o
Dried foods have lower water values, so foods with a water content of less than
5 % are most likely powders or oils
o
Fortified foods have significantly higher contents for particular nutrients than
non-fortified foods
Food naming is consistent
o
E.g. ‘Bread, wheat, wholegrain’ instead of ‘Wholegrain wheat bread'
o
Consistent use of singular or plural , e.g. use `berry` or `berries`
Scientific names are included and verified for each food when appropriate. To verify
scientific names, consult authoritative sources; links to many of these are available
through SciName Finder™ (http://www.sciname.info/
Food names are translated correctly if several national languages exist.
The food description of cooked foods includes whether salt was added or not (e.g.
potatoes boiled, without salt)
If a food description systems (e.g. LanguaL) is used all foods are indexed accordingly
All foods are checked to confirm that their water and/or fat content are consistent with
the food description
It is important to check that:

12

groups

Food codes

Examples of
unambiguo
us food
description

All individual foods are assigned to an appropriate food group
Within each food group, all foods are listed alphabetically (e.g.by the main language in
the country). In user DBs, foods can be sorted by the food code, the food name and/or
the food group code.
The food grouping system is reported in the general documentation accompanying the
user table/DB
The food group codes reported in the introduction/general documentation correspond
to those in the user table/DB
It is documented if the database and categorisation system allows assignment of foods to
more than one food group
It is important to check that:
No duplication of food codes exists in a user table/DB for different foods
The food code once assigned for a given food is not modified
The food code once assigned for a given food is not reassigned to another food item, if
the original food item has been deleted
The same food code is used when the data on the food entry is updated/revised
The food codes presented in the food index/documentation correspond to those in the
user table/DB
Note:
In relational FCDBMSs, food codes can be assigned automatically, in which case the
above checks are unnecessary.
Meat
Specify the animal (e.g. chicken, beef, mutton)
Type of the cut (e.g. chop, fillet, leg)
Fat content (e.g. lean, medium fat, fatty – or better indicate % fat content in name)
Type of cooking (e.g. boiled, fried, grilled)
With or without edible fat
Milk
Specify the animal (e.g. cow, goat, buffalo)
Processing type (e.g. dried, liquid, UHT, pasteurized, condensed, evaporated)
Flavoured, sweetened
Fat content (e.g. whole, partially skimmed, skimmed –and/or indicate % fat content in
name)
Fortification/enrichment, if relevant

3.2 Checks on components

Checks on components cover general checks for all components (component identification, units,
denominators, simple mathematical checks) plus specific checks for individual
components/component groups. In addition systematic checks can be conducted across the entire
user table/DB and per food. In the following, it is assumed that INFOODS tagnames were used but
most checks would also apply to EuroFIR component identifiers.
Table 2. Checks on components
Component
name and
expression

It is important to check that:
All values are expressed per 100 g edible portion on fresh weight basis (EP), unless
otherwise stated
The units, decimal places and significant figures indicated in the user table/DB are in
concordance with the most widely used modes of expressions (see Annex 2; p. 36).
The INFOODS food component identifiers presented in the documentation

13

Mathematical
checks

Comparability
of components

Edible
portion/
inedible
part/refuse

Proximates

correspond to those in the user table/DB
The component IDs given in the general documentation correspond to those in the
user table/DB
It is important to check that:
All values for aggregated foods are included in the range (except for outliers)
Minimum values ≤ representative value (mean/median)
Maximum values ≥ representative value (mean/median)
Standard deviation (SD) is calculated only if n is ≥ 3
It is important to check that:
For components for which different INFOODS tagnames exist, care was taken when
aggregating values in the reference DB. Only those foods and their values were
aggregated which had the same INFOODS tagname
For components for which several INFOODS tagnames exist, it is clearly stated
which tagname is used in the user table/DB
If the compiler wishes to inform the user that different component tagnames are used
depending on the food (e.g. FAT and FATCE), this should be clearly indicated. For
example, if FAT is the standard expression in the user table , one can print FATCE
values in parenthesis; in a user DB, one can list values for both tagnames (FAT and
FATCE)
It is important to check that:
Values for edible or inedible portion/refuse, derived from different sources have been
copied/converted correctly according to definitions given in the documentation
The chosen definition (edible portion or refuse), or expressions (coefficient or
percentage) is applied consistently throughout the entire user table/DB
If the coefficient was chosen as expression, all values are within the range 0 – 1
If the percentage (%) was chosen as expression, all values are between 0 – 100
Ideally, if the refuse/waste is given the refuse should be described (e.g. Banana, 36 %
waste: skin)
If the edible or inedible portion/refuse values of cooked foods was calculated
according to the formula, indicated in Annex 3 (p. 37) it has been applied correctly for
all relevant foods and is reported in the documentation of the user table/DB
It is important to check that:
The sum of proximates (=∑of water + protein + fat + available carbohydrates +
dietary fibre + alcohol + ash) is within the acceptable range set in one’s own DB.
Preferable: 97 - 103 g (Greenfield and Southgate, 2003), acceptable: 95 - 105 g
If the sum of the values falls outside these ranges, scrutinize:
o
Analytical values at the archival and data source level
o
The calculation of protein values (was the appropriate factor used?)
o
The expression of carbohydrates
o
Units and denominators of all proximates
o
The completeness of the proximate values. Check that all contributing values
are included when applying the formula:
 Water + protein + fat + available carbohydrates + dietary fibre +
alcohol + ash ≈ 100 (fresh weight basis), or
 Water + protein + fat + total carbohydrates + alcohol + ash ≈ 100
(fresh weight basis)
Note:
The major determinant is how carbohydrates are handled. If available or total
carbohydrates are calculated by difference, no discrepancies should exist. See
exceptions below
If available carbohydrates expressed in monosaccharide equivalents (CHOAVLM) are
used in the DB, the sum of proximates often exceeds 100 due to the water included in

14

the carbohydrate values.

Energy in kJ
(kcal)

Water/
Moisture

Protein,
nitrogen
components

Exceptions:
For insects the sum of proximates may exceed the acceptable range of 95 – 105 g/100 g
EP, if fibre values are determined via acid detergent method (FIBAD) and even more
so, if fibre is determined via neutral detergent method (FIBND). These methods
capture the chitin content in insects and amino acids are double counted, once as fibre
and once as protein. (Finke 2007; and personal observations)
For some food groups, including meat and fish (except for offal (e.g. liver) and
molluscs) carbohydrate values are assumed to be zero. In case of a calculated negative
carbohydrate value but between 0 and -5 g/100 g EP, the carbohydrate value could be
set at zero, if it is plausible that the food does not contain any carbohydrates, e.g. for
meat and fish, except offal (e.g. liver) and molluscs. However, the data set should be
revisited. If the calculated carbohydrate value for these foods is > 5 g/100 g or < -5
g/100 g EP the entire food entry should be removed from the DB
If protein is calculated as sum of hydrous amino acids (including water), the sum of
proximates will exceed 100 due to hydration.
It is important to check that:
No energy values of the user table/DB were copied from other sources, but were
calculated in the own DB
kJ energy values were preferably not calculated from energy values in kcal
All energy values were calculated correctly by applying the formula as defined in
ones´ own DB/table (see Annex 3 (p. 37)for different ´metabolizable energy`
conversion factors)
All components used to calculate the energy content have a value in the user table/DB
The applied formula is documented in the user table/DB for user information
It is important to check that:
Values for water content are given for every food in the user table/DB
Water values are in accordance with the food description
Only foods with similar water contents have been aggregated. If water contents of
food items were significantly different, their nutrient values should have been adjusted
before aggregation (e.g. check that values of raw and boiled rice were not aggregated,
especially if values seem incoherent)
Exception:
It is sometimes appropriate to have aggregated foods in a user table/DB from products
with different moisture content, e.g. “Fresh fruit” as a weighted average based on national
consumption data because the consumption surveys asked for such generic foods for use in
calculating nutrient intakes
It is important to check that:
Applicability of nitrogen to protein conversion factors (see Annex 3 (p. 37) for the
Jones factors) (XN) has been verified when protein values were borrowed from other
sources (check also for archival/reference DB)
XN were correctly applied if protein was calculated from total nitrogen value (NT)
multiplied by XN All values are present in the reference DB to allow own
calculations, if possible
Total protein calculated from nitrogen (PROT) can be < ∑ anhydrous amino acids (if
all individual amino acids are given). If hydrous amino acids are used to build the sum,
it is in general higher than PROT
Note:
If all individual amino acids were analysed, the sum of individual amino acids in
hydrous form will be higher than the value for total protein calculated from nitrogen

15

Total fat, fatty
acids, lipid
components

(PROT). This can be explained by the fact that through the peptide bond (amid bond)
among single amino acids H20 is eliminated which leads to a lower molecular weight
and subsequently lower protein value compared to the amino acids being summed
individually. For further information see FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on Conversion
among different units, denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS, 2012a)
Total protein, calculated as sum of amino acids, anhydrous < ∑ of individual amino
acids(normally expressed in hydrous form)
Total protein, calculated as sum of amino acids, including water (hydrous) = ∑ of
individual amino acids (normally expressed in hydrous form)
For foods high in non-protein nitrogen (NNP) (e.g. many shellfish, crustacean, human
breast milk):
o
True protein (total protein, calculated from protein nitrogen) (PROCNP)) =
total nitrogen (NT) – non protein nitrogen (NNP) x XN
Fat, total
It is important to check that:
If fat values derived from Soxhlet method (FATCE) were used, because no other fat
values were available, the FATCE values should be marked differently in the user
table e.g. in parenthesis or given under a specific tagname, to indicate lower quality.
The Soxhlet method is inappropriate for foods with high amounts of polar and bound
lipids
If the value for total fat (FAT) is = 0 :
o
Fatty acids = 0
o
Cholesterol = 0
Note:
Since fatty acids are often reported to 3 decimal places and fat to 2 decimal places, it is
possible for the fatty acids to have very small values, when total fat is reported to be zero;
this can also be true for cholesterol, as the unit is often given in mg and the fat in g, it is
possible that small values for cholesterol are given when the fat values are actually 0
Fat, total (FAT) = animal fat + plant fat
Fat, total (FAT) > cholesterol (CHOLE) or (CHOL) + total fatty acids (FACID)
Total fat (FAT) > total saturated fatty acids (FASAT) + total monounsaturated fatty
acids (cis) (FAMS) + total polyunsaturated fatty acids (cis) (FAPU) + trans-fatty acids
(FATRN)
Total fat (FAT) > total fatty acids (FACID)
Fatty acids
It is important to check that:
If values for component groups are given e.g. for total saturated fatty acids (FASAT),
or for total polyunsaturated fatty acids (FAPU) it should be documented which single
fatty acids are included in these component groups
Total fatty acids (FACID) = total saturated fatty acids (FASAT) + total
monounsaturated fatty acids (cis) (FAMS) + total polyunsaturated fatty acids (cis)
(FAPU) + trans-fatty acids (FATRN)
Total fatty acids (FACID) > total fatty acids (cis) + total trans-fatty acids
Total monounsaturated fatty acids (FAMS) ≥ any individual monounsaturated fatty
acids
Total polyunsaturated fatty acids (FAPU) ≥ any individual polyunsaturated fatty
acids
Total n-3 fatty acids (FAPUN3) ≥ any individual n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid
Total trans-fatty acids (FATRN) ≥ any individual trans-fatty acid

16

Carbohydrate
s, starch,
sugars

Note:
If cis form is analysed, report as cis fatty acids
If trans form is analysed, report as trans fatty acids
If cis is not part of the component name, it is assumed that it includes both cis and
trans forms
Carbohydrates
It is important to check that:
In case different carbohydrate definitions/expressions are used, it is clearly stated in
the documentation and the values are marked accordingly in the user table, or assigned
specific food component identifiers (tagnames) in the user DB
If carbohydrates were calculated by difference, the correct formula was applied and
none of the contributing values is missing:
o
Available carbohydrates, calculated by difference (CHOAVLDF): = 100 (weight in grams [water + protein + fat + ash + alcohol + dietary fibre] in
100 g of food)
o
Total carbohydrates, calculated by difference (CHOCDF) = 100 - (weight in
grams [water + protein + fat + ash + alcohol] in 100 g of food)
Values for carbohydrates by difference have not been copied from other sources but
were calculated in one’s own DB. Prior to the calculation, related components (see
formula above) were defined and their values were checked
Total carbohydrates by summation (CHOCSM) > any of the individual
carbohydrate fractions (e.g. total sugars, total dietary fibre, starch)
Note:
According to FAO (2003), available carbohydrates are preferred to total carbohydrates.
Total carbohydrates should be phased out. Available carbohydrates by weight (analytical
values) are preferred over available carbohydrates by difference. The expression of ‘total
available carbohydrates’ should be avoided as it creates confusion.

Dietary fibre,
crude fibre

Ash, minerals

Total sugars
It is important to check that:
Total sugars (SUGAR) ≥ ∑ individual mono- and disaccharides
Total sugar (SUGAR) > added sugar (ADSUGAR)
Total sugars (SUGAR) > any of the individual mono- and disaccharides. (e.g. sucrose,
glucose, fructose, lactose, maltose and galactose)
It is important to check that:
When the mean/median for one food item from different data sources was calculated
in the reference DB, undesired fibre expressions (e.g. crude fibre (FIBC) and other
dietary fibre expressions) were excluded from the aggregated fibre value for the user
table/DB, as much as possible
If only crude fibre (FIBC) values were available, dietary fibre values were estimated
from another food. If this was not possible, the crude fibre (FIBC) values should be
clearly marked to indicate lower quality in the user DB, e.g. by putting values in
parentheses, or by using different food components identifiers (tagnames)
Wherever possible, indicate fibre method at value level
Total dietary fibre (FIBTG), (FIBTS) ≥ ∑ soluble fibre (FIBSOL) + insoluble fibre
(FIBINS)
Ash
It is important to check that:
If carbohydrate values were calculated by difference, the ash value is reported in the
user table/DB
If an ash value is missing, a value should be borrowed from a similar food or estimated

17

from the sum of minerals.
Ash values in g > ∑ of individual minerals (transformed from mg to g)
Ash value (g/100 g EP)> (CA (mg) + FE (mg) + MG (mg)+ P (mg) + K (mg) + NA
(mg) + ZN (mg)+ CU (mg) + MN (mg) + CL (mg))/1000
o
o

Vitamins and
pro-vitamins

Minerals in mcg (e.g. selenium or iodine) have an insignificant contribution to
ash and therefore do not need to be taken into account
More investigations need to be carried out for the estimation of ash values
from minerals (e.g. factors for oxidized forms of minerals)

Minerals
Not all minerals are necessarily reported in a user table/DB (e.g. chloride (CL) is often
not reported). For CL, a possible solution to include its amount in the data check
would be to multiply the sodium (NA) value x 2.5 to obtain NACL (assuming that all
CL is coupled with NA)
Total iron (FE) = heme (HAEM) + non heme iron (NHAEM)
Vitamin A (VITA_RAE), Vitamin A (VITA)
It is important to check that:
The vitamin A values were calculated within one’s own DB and not copied from
other sources
The same definition/formula was applied throughout the entire DB
The conversion factors were correctly applied (see Annex 1; p. 26) and described in the
database documentation
The definition/formula used is indicated in the documentation for user information
No contributing values were missing to calculate vitamin A as retinol activity
equivalent (VITA_RAE) or as retinol equivalent (VITA). Components needed to
calculate Vitamin A values are retinol, β-carotene, α -carotene, β- cryptoxanthin and
conversion factors
Vitamin A; retinol activity equivalent (VITA_RAE) in mcg < Vitamin A; retinol
equivalent (VITA) in mcg
Vitamin A; retinol activity equivalent (VITA_RAE) in international units (IU) <
Vitamin A; retinol equivalent (VITA) in IU (generally, the use of IU should be
discontinued)
β- carotene (CARTB), β- carotene equivalent (CARTBEQ)
It is important to check that:
If beta carotene equivalent (CARTBEQ) is reported, the values were calculated
within one’s own DB and not copied from other sources
No contributing values to calculate β- carotene equivalent (CARTBEQ) were missing
If beta carotene equivalent (CARTBEQ) is reported, the correct conversion factors
were applied (see Annex 1; p. 26)
It is clearly stated which of the two expressions (CARTB or CARBTEQ) is used in
the user table/DB. If CARBTEQ was used as standard expression, the values for βcarotene (CARTB) should be marked, e.g. by putting the values in parenthesis in the
user tables, or by using different food components identifiers (tagnames) in the user
DB
In a comprehensive user table/DB, CARTBEQ is accompanied by values of α carotene (CARTA), β- carotene (CARTB) and β- cryptoxanthin (CRYPXB)
Niacin
It is important to check that:
If total niacin equivalent (NIAEQ) is used, the values were calculated within one’s
own DB and not copied from other sources

18

Either report niacin (NIA) or niacin equivalent (NIAEQ) should appear in the user
table/DB. If both expressions are used, clearly identify in the user table/DB each one
by e.g. putting values for (NIA) in parenthesis if NIAEQ is the standard expression, or
by using different food components identifiers (tagnames
Total niacin equivalents (NIAEQ) in mg = niacin, preformed (NIA) in mg +
potential niacin from tryptophan (NIATRP) in mg usually equal to 1/60 tryptophan
(TRP) (if tryptophan is expressed in g, check that the unit is adjusted accordingly for
niacin equivalent normally in mg)
Folate
It is important to check that:
If dietary folate equivalent (FOLDFE) is reported, the values were calculated within
one’s own DB and not copied from other sources
If FOLDFE was reported, the correct formula was applied and no value of the
contributing components is missing
Dietary folate equivalent (FOLDFE) = food folate (pteroylpolyglutamates)(FOLFD)
+ 1.7 x synthetic folic acid (pteroylmonoglutamic acid)(FOLAC)
Folic acid (FOLAC) which is the synthetic form used in fortification, is not present in
foods in their natural state
Folic acid (FOLAC) is not used when folate (FOL) is meant
It is clearly stated which folate definition/expression is reported in the user table/DB.
If several expressions are used, clearly identify each one e.g. by placing values in
parenthesis in the user table or use by using different food components identifiers
(tagnames) in the user DB
Vitamin E
It is important to check that:
If vitamin E, expressed as α - tocopherol equivalent (VITE) is used, the values were
calculated within one’s own DB and not copied from other sources
The same formula was used throughout the entire DB when calculating α -tocopherol
equivalent (VITE) and no values for the contributing components were missing
(formula see Annex 1; p. 26)
Vitamin E (VITE) > α-tocopherol (TOCPHA)
It is clearly stated which vitamin E definition is used in the user table/DB. If both
expressions are used, this should be clearly indicated, e.g. by putting values for α tocopherol (TOCPHA) in parenthesis, or by using different food components
identifiers (tagnames) in the user DB
Note:
The latest version of the DRI published by NAS/IOM states that α- tocopherol is the
active form of vitamin E and that the use of α- tocopherol equivalents is to be
discontinued.
Vitamin D
It is important to check that:
If vitamin D equivalent (VITDEQ) is used, the values are calculated within one’s own
DB and not copied from other sources
The same formula was used throughout the entire DB when calculating vitamin D
values and no values for the contributing components were missing (formula see
Annex 1; p. 26)
Vitamin D (VITD) ≥ vitamin D2 (ERGCAL) + vitamin D3 (CHOCAL)

19

Vitamin D equivalent (VITDEQ) = vitamin D3 (CHOCAL) + vitamin D2
(ERGCAL) + 5 x 25-hydroxycholecaciferol (CHOCALOH)
Vitamin D equivalent (VITDEQ) > vitamin D (VID) (in food rich in 25hydroxycholecalciferol, e.g. pork)
1 IU vitamin D = 0.025 mcg vitamin D (VITD)/ cholecalciferol (CHOCAL)
It is important to be consistent throughout the DB. If different expressions are used,
clearly identify each one, either by putting the values in parenthesis in user tables, or
by using different component identifiers in user DBs

Systematic
checks

Missing values

Vitamin C
It is important to check that:
VITC = L-ascorbic acid (ASCL) + plus L-dehydroascorbic acid (ASCDL)
Vitamin C (VITC) > L-ascorbic acid (ASCL) (in particular for processed foods)
If (VITC) and (ASCL) values are reported, put values for L-ascorbic acid (ASCL) for
processed foods in parenthesis if VITC is the standard expression in the user table/DB
or use different food components identifiers (tagnames) in user DB
Foods should be sorted by ascending or descending values for a given component
within a food group (graphs/statistics can also be used), in order to easily identify
typing or unit errors. See also below: Specific checks within food groups.
If a value of a component within a particular food group appears unreasonably high or
low, the reason for this should be determined. As unreasonably high and low values
are not defined internationally, internal guidelines should be agreed on between
compilers of a given database and preferably be documented and accessible, e.g. as in a
procedure:
o
Foods in one’s own DB can be compared with foods from external sources to
evaluate/ensure that the values are comparable. For this comparison it is
important that the foods have the same scientific name, same part analysed,
same processing state, similar water and fat values, same fortification;
moreover, the nutrient definition, unit and denominator should be the same)
(For more information see FAO/INFOODS Guidelines for Food Matching,
version 1.1 (FAO/INFOODS, 2011)
o
Compare values with the previous version of your own database (this is easy
when food codes were not changed)
When reviewing values, more attention should be given to frequently consumed
foods, or those with high nutrient values for specific components, because they can be
more critical for the assessment of nutrient intakes than rarely consumed foods. One
way of doing is keeping the RDA in mind: 200% of RDI more of vitamin B12 in one
food than in another one is maybe not so important if the level of vitamin B12 in these
two foods corresponds to 0.001% of the RDA).
When evaluating values, the natural and analytical variability should be taken into
account
If possible, nutrient intakes should be calculated using the food consumption data that
were used with the former version of the user table/DB. Major changes should be
identified and reasons for the changes investigated. If no national food consumption
data exist, use your own food consumption record.
It is important to check that:
Missing values are as few as possible
Missing values are never assigned a 0 value, unless evidence exists that the value can be
presumed zero (see below: Absence of food components in specific food groups)
In order to avoid missing values, data can be:
Estimated from a similar food within one’s own user table/DB, or from other sources

20

Absence of
components in
specific food
groups

Specific checks
within food
groups

Calculated through recipe calculation or other standard procedures
Presumed as zero if the food is known not to contain the nutrient, e.g. vitamin C in
oil ( see below Absence of components in food groups)
For information on standardized procedures on how to estimate missing values, see
Schakel et al. (1997) and Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 8)
Whenever missing values are filled in, it is critical that the technique used to determine
the value is documented
If no other ingredients are added, the foods in their natural form will not contain certain
components, for example:
Retinol, Vitamin B12, Cholesterol, heme iron = 0 in plant foods (exceptions for
Vitamin B12 which can occur in fermented foods and mushrooms)
Alcohol = 0 in all animal and plant foods unless fermented
Dietary fibre = 0 in animal foods such as meat, poultry, fish, eggs, milk (except
insects)
Carbohydrates = 0 or trace in non-processed animal foods such as meat, poultry, fish,
except in offals (e.g. liver, brain) or molluscs
Starch = 0 in non-processed animal foods, e.g. meat, poultry, fish
Vitamin D3 = 0 in plant foods
Vitamin D2 = 0 in animal foods
Vitamin K1 (phylloquinone) = 0 in animal foods
Vitamin K2 (menaquinone) = 0 in plant foods
Folic acid = 0 for all foods (except when fortified)
Vitamin C = 0 in oils
It is important to check that:
Characteristic components for a food group are in an acceptable range within the food
group. Examples for some food groups and their characteristic components are listed
below. The list is not exhaustive and needs further improvement. Lists per food
groups indicating common ranges have been developed (for raw, unfortified foods)
and will be presented in separate FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on acceptable ranges
among food groups
Values indicated are for raw, unprocessed and unfortified, foods (unless otherwise
stated) (expressed per 100 g edible portion of fresh weight (EP)
Cereals (excluding pseudo cereals, e.g. quinoa, amaranth)
Water values are ~ 7 g - 15 g/100 g EP
Protein values are ~ 6 g - 14g/100 g EP
Vitamin C and vitamin A values are very low (unless fortified)
Starchy roots and tubers
Water values are ~ 60 - 75 g/ 100 g EP
Starch and carbohydrate values are ~ 20 - 40 g/100 g EP
Fat values are low in raw, fresh starchy roots and tubers ~ 0.1 - 0.35 g/100 g EP
Legumes and pulses
Water values in dried legumes/mature seeds are ~ 7 g - 13 g/ 100 g EP
Protein values in dried legumes/mature seeds are ~ 18 g - 35 g/ 100 g EP
Vitamin C and vitamin A values are very low (unless added)
Vegetables
Fat values of raw vegetables should generally be below 1 g/100 g EP(with exceptions
such as soybeans, if included in vegetable group)
Fruits
Fat values of should generally be below 1 g/100 g EP (with certain exceptions such as
avocado)
Nut

21

Examples on
specific checks
between foods
due to
different
processing
methods, or
different
colours

Vitamin C and vitamin A values are very low (unless added)
Milk
Cholesterol in dairy products should be proportional to fat content
Values of vitamins A, D, E in dairy products should be proportional to fat content
(unless fortified)
The major variation is in the fat and fat-soluble vitamins
Calcium levels of milks (of same animal species/breed, same water content) should be
similar (except when fortified)
Dietary fibre values are zero
Meat and poultry
Protein levels of poultry rarely exceed 30 g/100 g EP
The main cause of variation in animal products are the proportion of lean to fat tissues
and the proportion of edible to inedible materials (e.g. bone)
Vitamin B1 is low in all meat except pork
Fish
Protein levels of fresh fish rarely exceed 30 g/100 g EP
Vitamin B1 is low and vitamin C is very low
Example 1. Raw versus cooked
Nutrient values of raw foods ≠ nutrient values of cooked foods because of yield and
nutrient loss/gain
When water content is absorbed in the cooking process, all other values for nutrients
are lower in the boiled food (if no other ingredients were added in the cooking
process)
Exception: vitamin contents (carotenoids) can appear to increase due to cooking as it
is easier to extract the carotenoids from the cooked food matrix than from the raw
Values for fat and fat-soluble components in fried lean food are higher than values for
fat and fat-soluble components in corresponding raw foods, due to added fat. Fatty
foods might lose more fat and fat-soluble components than absorbed (e.g. meat fried in
vegetable fat could contain less cholesterol or retinol than raw meat, except maybe
through concentration because of moisture loss).
Example 2. Raw versus dried
Nutrient values of raw foods ≠ nutrient values of dried foods
In dried foods, all values expect for water and heat-labile vitamins2 should be higher
than the values in the corresponding raw food
Generally, no values can be created, e.g. if in the raw state the food does not contain
any vitamin C value, these values cannot be present in the dried state
Note: This is true in particular for calculations/imputations for dried foods based on raw
foods. There are, however, some cases where the nutrient content is below the level of
determination/quantification in the raw food, but measurable in the dried food. There are
no retention factors for dried foods and they should be developed in the future. It seems
that some vitamins are highly decreased through drying.
Example 3. Parts of the foods removed
If a part of a food (e.g. the bran of a grain) is removed, values of components highly
concentrated in this part (e.g. in bran: dietary fibre, minerals, vitamins) should be
lower in the refined product than in the corresponding whole food
Examples 4. Colour of the food
Different colours of foods (yellow/orange/red/green) related to cultivar or stage of

2

Depending on the degree of destruction some heat-labile vitamins may also be higher

22

ripening often signal variations in e.g. carotenoids, phytochemicals or sugars. It is
important that the food name reflects these differences
For example, values for carotenes in mango pulp, deep orange > than values for
carotenes in mango pulp, pale orange

3.3 Checks on recipes
The following checks include those before starting the recipe calculation, during and after the recipe
calculation and recommendations on the documentation of recipes.
Table 3. Checks on recipes
Before
starting the
recipe
calculation

Recipe
calculation

Documenta
tion

It is important to check that:
All ingredients from the recipes are entered in the DB and have a complete set of
components which have been checked and validated
Added water was not forgotten in the recipe calculation (e.g. water added in soups) as it is
often not part of the ingredient list in cook books
Added fat was not forgotten in the recipe calculation (e.g. fat absorbed during frying, butter
added to potatoes) as it is often not part of the ingredient list in cook books
The correct ingredients and same amounts of ingredients were used in the recipe calculation
as stated in the reference recipe. No errors were introduced when the ingredients were
transformed from household units (e.g. one big onion) to gram edible portion, e.g.
forgetting to apply edible coefficient to an ingredient (if applicable) or choosing the wrong
weight of food unit
All nutrient values of all ingredients were completed and verified before starting the recipe
calculation
No values are missing for any significant ingredient used for the recipe calculation. It is
acceptable to have missing values only if a missing value belongs to a minor ingredient, or if
the missing value is expected to make only a small nutrient contribution to the recipe
The correct ingredients from the DB were chosen for the recipe calculation and source is
documented
Appropriate yield factors (YF) and nutrient retention factors (RF) were chosen for the
recipe calculation and sources are documented
For all cooked foods/recipes the same recipe calculation system and the same set of YF and
RF were selected. If different calculation systems were used, this should be documented
That RFs for individual foods were used, if they exist for the specific food. In case they do
not exist for the specific food the RF of the relevant (sub) group was chosen
It is important to check that:
All formulas in the recipe calculation were correctly applied
Water or fat as ingredients in recipes were not confused with the components ‘water’ or ‘fat,
total’ that are measured
The calculated nutrients of single-ingredient recipes (e.g. potatoes boiled, without salt) are
consistently different from the nutrient values of the corresponding raw food and they are
in line with the YF and RF
All steps in the recipe calculation were carried out correctly and that no errors occurred
(e.g. no zero values or too low values were created in the recipe, because of missing values
for some ingredients)
If all ingredients have a missing value for a certain component, then the recipe should also
have a missing value for this component and not a 0 value
Calculated recipes were updated when the nutrient composition of any ingredient has been
updated
It is important to check that:
The source of recipes, YF and RF are included in the documentation of the user table/DB
The recipe calculation system used (if recipes were calculated) is documented in the user

23

table/DB
The weight and dimensions of measured foods (e.g. one big onion, one tablespoon of oil) is
given
A description of the recipe preparation, the cooking method and YF is included per recipe
in the documentation
A list of recipes including all ingredients and their amounts is documented and published in
the user table/DB
The food description of cooked foods includes whether salt was added to the water or not
(e.g. potatoes boiled, with salt)
If recipes are named differently within countries or recipes have the same name but contain
different ingredients depending on the region, the varying ingredients and/or region is
added to the recipe name (and probably the synonym name)
If a food code is assigned for the single recipes, the food code is also reported within the list
of recipes in order to facilitate a cross checking of the recipe and its nutrient values

3.4 Checks on data documentation

Documentation is essential for data quality and data evaluation and should be comprehensive. The
following checks are divided in three parts of data documentation. The first part is a check on the
general documentation of the whole user table/DB. The second part is a check on the documentation
included in the user table/DB and the third part includes checks to be carried out on the food index
and the reference list.
Table 4. Checks on data documentation
Introduction
/
general
documentati
on

It is important to check that:
General information on the total number of foods and total number of components
presented in the user table/DB is reported
The publication year and number/version/release of the edition are given
Differences/changes compared to previous versions are reported
The overall method of compilation is indicated (including information on food
composition database management system used, format of user table/DB available)
The content of all DB files is explained
Information on food identification is indicated including:
o
Food groups (if used)
o
Food codes
o
Food description systems (e.g. national, LanguaL, INFOODS)
Information on component nomenclature is documented, including:
o
Information on component IDs, codes and names, method of analysis,
definition, comments, units, denominators
o
A table with INFOODS tagnames used (or EuroFIR component identifiers)
o
All conversion factors used
Documentation of cooked foods and recipes is included (see section 3.3, table 3)
A list of all abbreviations and symbols used in the user table/DB is indicated (e.g. trace,
ND)
The quality of data is documented, including information on:
o
Quality assessment system used
o
How data were selected for the user table/DB (e.g. taken from one source or
several sources) and aggregated (e.g. mean and/or median)
o
Tests for outliers (if used)
o
n (e.g. representing the number of individual analytical samples, or the number
of data points) is defined
A table of contents is included
If the introduction is available in several languages, the translation was verified

24

Documentati
on in the
user
table/DB

Food Index
and reference
list

It is important to check that:
Comprehensive data documentation at value level (preferably), and/or at food level is
given: source and calculation method (and if possible additionally analytical methods,
sampling, n, etc)
Variability of data is reported, e.g. through standard deviation (SD) or standard error
(SE) and ranges (min and maximum values)
n is indicated and defined (e.g. representing the number of individual analytical
samples, or the number of individual data sources)
The standard deviation (SD) or standard error (SE) was only calculated if 3 or more
data entries were reported
All nutrient values correspond with the definitions indicated in the introduction or
documentation
Data are expressed in uniform standard units and correspond with the units indicated
in the introduction/documentation
The components are clearly identified and coded, preferably by linking them to
INFOODS food component identifiers (or EuroFIR component identifiers)
Food name and description are complete and unambiguous
If food description systems are used (e.g. LanguaL) all foods are indexed accordingly
It is important to check that:
In user tables, the food names are listed alphabetically in the food index in the national
language(s) and English
If different national languages exist, their translations are verified and are included in
the food index (one food index per language)
The scientific names are verified and are included in the food index
The food index is included and that page numbers and/or food codes indicated in the
food index correspond to those in the user table/DB
All references (on value or food level) to sources of data are reported and are included
in the reference list
The same reference style has been used consistently throughout and no reference is
missing

25

Annex 1 Extract of food components, recommended units and INFOODS tagnames
The table below presents a selection of the INFOODS food components identifiers, also called tagnames. For more information and additional tagnames
see INFOODS (2012b), Klensin et al. (1989), and Charrondiere et al. (2011ab, Module 4b).
Table 5. Extract of food components, recommended units and INFOODS tagnames (and corresponding EuroFIR component identifiers plus
additional fields needed to identify corresponding tagname)
Component

INFOODS tagnames

Edible
portion

EDIBLE: edible portion coefficient

3

Unit3

Comments
It is recommended that values for the edible part (or the inedible part/refuse)
are recorded in the user table/DB for each food entry (if information is
available)
These values are needed:
o
for a good food description
o
to transform the weight of foods as purchased to the edible parts of
the food
o
to facilitate a correct food matching
Different terms (e.g. edible portion, inedible portion/refuse) and modes of
expression (e.g. percentage %, or coefficient) exist.
Examples on how to calculate edible coefficients for cooked foods based on raw
foods (for foods where the inedible part is not discarded e.g. meat and fish with
bones) are given in Annex 3 (p. 37)

Recommended unit

26

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
EDIBLE

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Comments

Energy

ENERC: energy, total metabolizable;
calculated from the energy-producing food
components

kJ
(kcal)

Energy values of foods presented in the user table/DB should always be
calculated in ones´ own DB, by applying the `metabolizable energy`
conversion factors from Atwater. Different `metabolizable energy`
conversion factors are listed in Annex 3 (p. 37). INFOODS recommends
using the ´General Atwater factors including for dietary fibre´ for use in
user tables/DB
It is not advisable to calculate kJ energy values from energy values in kcal because
this may introduce bias. Energy conversion factors in kJ are neither exactly 4.184
nor 4.2 times higher than energy conversion factors in kcal; it may just give an
indication

g

Values for water are required at all levels of data management including
archival, reference and user table/DB. Water is the most important
component to check and be published in user tables/DBs
Water is required to calculate the nutrient values to per 100 g fresh weight of
edible portion (EP) when, in the literature, nutrient values were reported on
dry matter basis (DM)
DM values are not published in user tables/DBs, but in the scientific
literature nutrient values are often reported per 100 g DM. Values reported
in DM can be recalculated to fresh weight, if the DM value or the water
value of the fresh food is given. Example:
Calculate values from per DM to per 100 g EP: Nutrient value (NV) (g/100 g EP)
= NV(g/100 g DM) x (100-water)/100

More tagnames exist, but are generally not
used in user tables/DB

Water

WATER: water
Synonyms: moisture

27

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
ENERC

WATER

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Protein and
nitrogen
components

PROT (formerly PROCNT): protein, total;
calculated from total nitrogen
XN: conversion factor for calculating total
protein from total nitrogen
NNP: non-protein nitrogen
PROCNP: protein, total; calculated from
protein nitrogen
NT: nitrogen, total

g

Values for protein are required at all levels of the data system (archival,
reference and user DB)
Protein is usually a calculated value derived from total nitrogen value
multiplied by nitrogen conversion factors
Nitrogen to protein conversion factors (XN) are given in Annex 3 (p. 37).
Nitrogen, total (NT) should be part of archival, reference and comprehensive
user table/DB, but must not necessarily be part of a concise/abridged user
table/DB.

Total fat,
fatty acids
and lipid
components

FAT: fat, total. Sum of triglycerides,
phospholipids, sterols and related
compounds. The analytical method is a
mixed solvent extraction.
Synonym: total lipid
FATCE: fat, total; derived by analysis using
continuous extraction. The Soxhlet method
has often been used to analyze for total fat
using continuous extraction. This method
tends to underestimate the total fat value of a
food.
FAMS: fatty acids, total monounsaturated
FAPU: fatty acids, total polyunsaturated
FASAT: fatty acids, total saturated
FATRN: fatty acids, total trans
FAPUN3: fatty acids, total n-3

g

Fat

Comments

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
- PROT+MI
-Conversion
factors are Method
Parameters
-no correspondence
for NNP
- PROT+MI
NT

FAT+MI

Fat values are required at all levels of the database management (archival,
reference and user DB)
Fat values are highly method depended
o
FAT is the preferred method
o
FATCE: fat, total, Soxhlet, should be avoided since it leads to
incomplete extraction and therefore results in lower values in
particular for foods with high amounts of polar and bound lipids
Fat and water values are important to check the food description and the
concordance between foods. Fat contents of foods need to be compared
when estimating values for fat-soluble components (e.g. fat-soluble vitamins,
fatty acids) from other sources. If the difference in fat values between the
food in the own DB and in the referenced source is higher than 10 % the
values for fat soluble components need to be adjusted.
Fatty acids
Individual fatty acids should be included in the reference DB. In concise user
tables/DB the fatty acids may be grouped in total saturated, total
monounsaturated and total polyunsaturated fatty acids.

28

FAT+MI

FAMS
FAPU
FASAT
FATRS
FAPUN3
FAPUN6

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

polyunsaturated
FAPUN6: fatty acids, total n-6
polyunsaturated

Carbohydrate
s

CHOAVL: carbohydrates, available. This
value includes the free sugars plus dextrins,
starch, and glycogen
CHOAVLM: carbohydrates, available;
expressed in monosaccharide equivalents.
This value includes the free sugars plus
dextrin, starch and glycogen
CHOAVLDF: carbohydrates, available;
calculated by difference. This values is
calculated:
100 - (weight in grams [water + protein +
fat + ash + alcohol + dietary fibre] in 100 g
of food)
CHOCDF: carbohydrates, total; calculated
by difference. This value is calculated:
100 - (weight in grams [water + protein +
fat + ash + alcohol] in 100 g of food)
CHOCSM: carbohydrates, total; calculated
by summation. This values is the sum of the
sugars, starches, oligosaccharide, and dietary
fibre

g

Comments
Fatty acid should be expressed in mg/100 g fresh weight of the edible portion
(EP). In the literature fatty acids are often expressed differently including per g
or 100 g fatty acids or fat. See the FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on Conversion
among different units, denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS, 2012a)
for further information.
Carbohydrates
Values for carbohydrates are required throughout the entire database system
(archival, reference and user DB)
The main difference in carbohydrates relates to:
o
whether or not fibre is included,
o
if it is analysed or calculated by difference,
o
if the value is expressed in anhydrous form or monosaccharide
equivalents
Generally, available carbohydrates are always preferred to total
carbohydrates, because, available carbohydrates represent only the
carbohydrates available to the human body
The most recommended expression is available carbohydrates by summation
(CHOAVL) This method however demands analytical values; in case
analytical data are not available for most foods, it is recommended to use
´carbohydrates, available by difference´ (CHOAVLDF) (FAO, 2003)
Starch
Starches including glycogen and polysaccharides should be part of a
comprehensive user DB
Oligosaccharides
Are defined as carbohydrates with 3 to 9 monomeric units
Some oligosaccharides can be included in dietary fibre, if they are resistant to
digestion in the intestine

29

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)

CHO+MI

CHO+MI+unit

CHO+MI

CHOT+MI

CHOT+MI

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Comments

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)

In many foods oligosaccharides are in small amounts and are, therefore, not
included in user tables/DB
Sugars total
In many user tables/DB sugars are defined as mono-and disaccharides
Sugars should be part of a concise user table/DB and individual mono, di -and
oligosaccharides as well as polyols should be part of a comprehensive user
table/DB
Fibre

FIBTG: fibre, total dietary; determined
gravimetrically by the AOAC total dietary
fibre method. (Prosky method) Sum of the
water-soluble
components and the water-insoluble
components of dietary fibre
FIBTS: fibre, total dietary; sum of nonstarch polysaccharide components and lignin
(Southgate method)
PSACNS/NSP: non-starch polysaccharide,
(Englyst fibre). This includes non-starch
polysaccharides but excludes lignin, resistant
starch and resistant oligosaccharides.
FIBAD: fibre; determined by acid detergent
method. Includes cellulose, lignin and some
hemicellulose
FIBADC: fibre, acid detergent method,
Clancy modification
FIBINS: fibre, water-insoluble. Sum of

g

Dietary fibre values are required at all levels of the database system (archival,
reference and user DB)
The values for fibre are method-depended and therefore need to be identified
by the method used. Any calculation including fibre (e.g. sum of proximates,
or carbohydrates calculated by difference) will be impacted by how the fibre
content was determined
New methods for dietary fibre have been developed which include all
residual starch and resistant oligosaccharides. As these methods are still
under development, it is suggested to wait for finalization before including
those values in the FCDB. As Codex definition for dietary fibre may include
resistant oligosaccharides they may have to be included in FCDB in future
INFOODS recommends using total dietary fibre by AOAC Prosky (FAO,
2003)
Dietary fibre by Prosky (FIBTG) captures most completely the components
with dietary fibre functions, followed by FIBTS and PSACNS/NSP.
It would be best to phase out the use of FIBAD, FIBADC, FIBND and FIBC in
favour of one of the other methods for determining total dietary fibre, such as
FIBTG.
New fibre methods are being developed including non-digestible oligosaccharides
for which new tagnames will be needed, once fully approved and used in FCTs.

30

FIBT+MI

FIBT+MI

NSP+MI

FIBT+MI

FIBT+MI
FIBINS+MI

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Ash

insoluble components from the AOAC total
dietary fibre method; includes primarily
lignin, cellulose, and most of the
hemicelluloses
FIBSOL: fibre, water-soluble
FIBND: fibre; determined by neutral
detergent method. Includes lignin, cellulose,
and insoluble hemicellulose
FIBC: fibre, crude
ASH: ash

Unit3

Comments

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)

FIBSOL+MI
FIBT+MI

FIBC+MI

g

Ash

ASH
Ash values are used in internal checks on the sum of proximates, in the
calculation of available or total carbohydrates, by difference. Therefore, it
should be part of the archival and reference DB but is often not included in a
concise user table/DB. Ash values should be reported, if carbohydrates are
calculated by difference. If no ash value is available an ash value needs to be
estimated from a similar food.
Ash values give an approximation of the total inorganic material.

Vitamin A
and
pro-vitamins

VITA_RAE: vitamin A; calculated by
summation of the vitamin A activities of
retinol and the active carotenoids.
Total vitamin A activity expressed in mcg

mcg

Inorganic constitutes
Sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc etc. should be part of a
concise use table/DB. Iodine and selenium should be included if they are a public
health concern.
Vitamin A
Total Vitamin A (VITA_RAE)), or total vitamin A (VITA) are the
recommended definitions to be used in user tables/DB
Vitamin A expressed in international units IU are obsolete and should not be
used anymore; however, if IU are used, it must be explicitly stated

31

VITA+MI+unit

Component

INFOODS tagnames
retinol activity equivalent (RAE) = mcg
retinol + 1/12 mcg ß- carotene + 1/24 mcg
other pro-vitamin A carotenoids
(or RAE = mcg retinol + 1/12 mcg ßcarotene equivalent)
VITA: vitamin A; calculated by summation
of the vitamin A activities of retinol and the
active carotenoids.
Total vitamin A activity expressed in mcg
retinol equivalent (RE) = mcg retinol + 1/6
mcg ß- carotene + 1/12 mcg other provitamin A carotenoids
(or RE = mcg retinol + 1/6 mcg ß- carotene
equivalent)
CARTA: alpha-carotene.
All-trans alpha-carotene only.
CARTB: beta-carotene.
All-trans beta-carotene only.
CRYPXB: beta-cryptoxanthin
CARTBEQ: beta-carotene equivalents. This
value is the sum of the beta-carotene + 1/2
quantity of other carotenoids with vitamin
A activity.
β-carotene equivalent = 1 β-carotene + 0.5 αcarotene + 0.5 β-cryptoxanthin

Unit3

Comments
For conversion from International Units (IU) to mcg retinol, β-carotene or
other pro-vitamin A carotenoids and vitamin A in RE and RAE see
FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on Conversion among different units,
denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS, 2012a)
Retinol
In the United Kingdom, for retinol ‘All-trans retinol equivalent’ in mcg is
used = mcg all-trans retinol + 0.75 mcg 13-cis retinol + 0.90 mcg
retinaldehyde
β- carotene/ β- carotene-equivalent
It would be best to phase out β- carotene equivalents in favour for reporting
individual carotenes and vitamin A
In archival and reference DB, β- carotene equivalent should not be listed
alone in the DB, but together with all contributing components
In the user tables, (CARTBEQ) might be better to state, as it is more
comprehensive and in user DB (CARTBEQ) should be accompanied by αcarotene, β-carotene and β- cryptoxanthin
Components that are needed to calculate Vitamin A values: retinol, βcarotene, α-carotene, β- cryptoxanthin, their conversion factors to calculate
VITA, VITA_RAE and CARTBEQ (β-carotene equivalent is not needed, if
values for the single pro-vitamins are given in the DB)
Lutein, lycopene and zeaxanthin do not have vitamin A activity

32

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)

VITA+MI+unit

CARTA
CARTB
CRYPXB
CARTBEQ

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Vitamin D

VITD: vitamin D; calculated by summation
of ergocalciferol and cholecalciferol. This
definition is mostly used
VITDEQ: vitamin D; Vitamin D3 + D2 +
5 x 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
VITDA: vitamin D; determined by bioassay.
The nutrient values are generally higher than
the values determined chemically.
ERGCAL: ergocalciferol (D2); occurs in
plant foods
CHOCAL: holecalciferol (D3); occurs in
animal foods
CHOCALOH: 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
VITE: vitamin E; calculated by summation
of the vitamin E activities of the active
tocopherols and tocotrienols; expressed as αtocopherol equivalents
= α-tocopherol + 0.4 ß-tocopherol + 0.1 γtocopherol+ 0.01 δ-tocopherol+ 0.3 αtocotrienol + 0.05 α-tocotrienol + 0.01 γtocotrienol (mostly used)
= α-tocopherol + 0.5 ß-tocopherol + 0.1 γtocopherol+ 0.3 α-tocotrienol
= α-tocopherol + 0.4 ß-tocopherol + 0.1 γtocopherol + 0.01 δ-tocopherol
VITEA: vitamin E; determined by bioassay

mcg

Vitamin E

Comments
VITD is mostly used; some DBs also use VITDEQ (e.g. Danish or British
food composition databases).
Vitamin D expressed in IU is not preferred; however, if used IU must be
explicitly stated
IU divided by 40 should be the value for vitamin D reported in mcg (1 IU
vitamin D
= 0.025 mcg vitamin D (VITD)/vitamin D3 (CHOCAL). See
also FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on Conversion among different units,
denominators and expressions (FAO/INFOODS, 2012a)

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
VITD+MI

VITD+MI
VITD+MI

ERGCAL
CHOCAL

mg

Generally user tables/DB use VITE. However, some user tables/DB report
TOCPHA (e.g. USDA)
In archival and reference DB, vitamin E (VITE) should not be listed alone in the
DB, but together with all contributing components

CHOCALOH
VITE+MI

It should be noted that the latest version of the DRIs published by NAS/IOM
state that α- tocopherol is the active form of vitamin E and that the use of αtocopherol equivalents is discontinued

VITE+MI

33

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Comments

TOCPHA: α-tocopherol
Niacin

VIT B6

Folate

NIA: niacin, preformed
NIAEQ: niacin equivalents, total. Preformed
niacin plus niacin equivalents from
tryptophan
NIATRP: niacin equivalents, from
tryptophan. 1/60 x tryptophan
VITB6C: vitamin B-6, total; calculated by
summation. Pyridoxal plus pyridoxamine
plus
pyridoxine
VITB6A: vitamin B-6, total;
determined by analysis
FOL: folate, total. Includes both conjugated
and free folate (determined by
microbiological assay). Folate, total: food
folates + fortified folic acid (if any) in
processed food.
FOLSUM: folate, sum vitamers. It includes
mostly tetrahydrofolate, 5methyltetrahydrofolate, 5formyltetrahydrofolate, 10-formylfolic acid,
10-formyldihyrdofolate and folic acid
(determined by HPLC).
FOLAC: folic acid, synthetic folic acid used

mg

Total niacin equivalent (NIAEQ) = niacin preformed (NIA) + 1/60 tryptophan
(TRP)

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
TOCPHA
NIA
NIAEQ+MI+unit

NIATRP
mg

VITB6+MI

VITB6+MI
mcg

FOL is the recommended expression and generally yields higher values than
FOLSUM
FOLFD is to be used if FOL, FOLAC and/or FOLDFE are also reported.
This is to distinguish the folate content in the food from the fortificant
amount

FOL+MI

FOL+MI

FOLAC

34

Component

INFOODS tagnames

Unit3

Comments

in fortification
FOLFD: folate food, naturally occurring
food folates (determined by microbiological
assay)
FOLDFE: folate, dietary folate equivalents.
= food folate + 1.7 x synthetic folic acid

Vitamin C

VITC: vitamin C. L-ascorbic acid plus Ldehydro-ascorbic acid. Usually analyzed by
HPLC
ASCL: L-ascorbic acid. Titrimetry can only
analyze L-ascorbic acid
ASCDL: L-dehydro-ascorbic acid (=
oxidized form of VITC)

EuroFIR
component
identifiers (MI=
method indicator)
FOL+MI
FOL+MI

mg

VITC generally yields highest values. In fresh food however, VITC and
ASCL should give comparable results, since the oxidized form of VITC, if
existing, is very low.
In fresh foods the reduced form (ASCL) is the major one present but the
amount of the dehydro-form (ASCDL) increases during cooking and
processing

35

VITC

ASCL
ASCDL

Annex 2 Units, significant figures and maximum decimal places
Adopted from Greenfield and Southgate (2003, p. 165) and the FAO/INFOODS Compilation Tool
(available at http://www.fao.org/infoods/software_en.stm).
In the user table/DB it is recommended that the maximal number of decimal places per nutrient
and the significant figures are fixed. No decimal places should be added, but values with higher
number of significant figures or decimal places should be rounded to the recommended number. It is
recommended to report values with 2 or 3 significant figures (Greenfield and Southgate, 2003,
pp.163-166; Charrondiere et al., 2011ab, Module 4c).
Table 6. Units, significant figures and maximum decimal places
Units, significant figures and maximum number of decimal places to be used for food
composition values in user table/DB (per 100 g edible portion of food)
Constituent
Unit
Number of
Maximal number of decimal
significant figures places

Energy
Major
constituents
(water,
protein,
fat,
carbohydrates,
dietary
fibre, alcohol)
Amino acids
Fatty acids (sum)
Individual fatty acids
Cholesterol
Inorganic constituents
Zinc, Iron
Copper, Manganese
Calcium, Magnesium,
Phosphorus, Potassium,
Sodium
Selenium, Iodine
Vitamins
Retinol
Carotenes
Vitamin D
Tocopherols
Vitamin K
Thiamin
Riboflavin
Niacin
Vitamin B6
Pantothenic acid
Biotin

kJ (kcal)
g

3
3

0
Water, dietary fibre, alcohol:
1

mg
g
g
mg

3
3
3
3

Others: 2
0
2
3
2

mg
mg

3
3

2
3

mg
mcg

3
2

0
2

mcg
mcg
mcg
mg
mcg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mcg

3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
0
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
2

36

Vitamin B12
Folates
Vitamin C

mcg
mcg
mg

2
2
3

2
0
2

Annex 3 Conversion factors
1. Edible portion coefficient/refuse values
The edible portion coefficient (EDIBLE), also called refuse, should preferably be measured by
weighing the edible and inedible parts of foods, including cooked foods.
In case measuring is not possible, there are two different approaches of estimating EDIBLE for
cooked foods when the inedible part is still part of the cooked food:
1. If weight loses are similar between the edible portion (EP) and the inedible portion (IP), the
EDIBLE is the same for the cooked as for the raw food. For example: The EDIBLE of a raw food
with skin is 0.80, the EDIBLE of the same cooked foods would be 0.80 as well.
2. If the inedible portion loses no or only an insignificant amount of weight (e.g. stones in fruits,
bones in meat) meaning that all weight loss occurs in the edible portion, the following calculation
can be applied:

The calculation steps illustrated in Figure.... can be summarized in the following equation:

Where: EDIBLE = edible portion coefficient
EP = edible portion
IP = inedible portion
YFEP = weight yield factor applicable on the edible portion

37

Energy conversion factors in kJ (kcal/g)
Food composition databases (FCDB) use the ‘metabolizable energy’ system that is based on the
Atwater energy conversion factors. ‘Gross energy’ and ‘net metabolizable energy’ are generally
not used in FCDBs.
Individual countries may have additional factors defined within food regulations.
The system of calculation chosen for energy should be clearly indicated.

Table 7. Atwater Energy conversion factors in kJ (kcal/g)
Components in
kJ (kcal)/g
Protein

General
Atwater
factors
17 (4.0)

More extensive
General Atwater
factors
17 (4.0)

Carbohydrates4

17 (4.0)

Fat

37 (9.0)

17 (4.0) or
16 (3.75)
37 (9.0)

Alcohol
Dietary Fibre
Organic acids
Polyols

29 (7.0)

29 (7.0)
8 (2.0)

Specific Atwater
factors
3.8-18.2
(0.91-4.36)
10.4-17.2
(2.48-4.16)
35.0-37.7
(8.37-9.02)
29 (7.0)

General Atwater factors
as proposed by Codex for
food labelling
17 (4.0)
17 (4.0)
37 (9.0)
29 (7.0)
13 (3.0)

Adapted from FAO (2003) and Codex Alimentarius (2007)
General Atwater factors
This system uses a single factor for each of the energy-yielding components, regardless of the food.
More extensive General Atwater factors-These factors are those most recommended for use in FCDBs.
A more extensive factor system has been derived by modifying, refining and making additions to the
Atwater general factor system. Factors for available carbohydrates expressed as monosaccharide
equivalent (16 kJ/g (3.75 kcal/g) and for dietary fibre (8kJ/g (2.0 kcal/g) were added.
Specific Atwater factors
This system includes the variability in combustion and digestibility of the energy yielding
components. Consequently, energy conversion factors differ between foods. However, these factors
are available for a small number of foods only. For more information see FAO (2003, p. 26) and
Merrill and Watt (1975).
General Atwater factors as proposed by Codex for food labelling
The system uses the general Atwater factors and adds a factor for organic acids. Protein is defined as
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen × 6.25 (and 6.38 for milk).

4

When available carbohydrate, expressed as monosaccharide equivalents is reported in a user table/DB, the conversion
factor of 16 kJ/g (3.75 kcal/g) should be used. When total carbohydrate or available carbohydrate expressed by difference
or by weight is reported, the conversion factor of 17 kJ/g (4.0 kcal/g) should be used (FAO, 2003)

38

Nitrogen to protein conversion factors
The nitrogen to protein conversion factors, also called Jones factors are used to convert the total
nitrogen value to the protein value (see table 8 below).
If a specific factor is not listed, 6.25 should be used until a more appropriate factor has been
determined
Nitrogen to protein conversion factors adapted from Jones (1941), unless indicated.
Table 8. Nitrogen to protein conversion factors
Foodstuff
Animal products
Meat and fish**
Gelatin
Milk
Casein**
Human milk **
Eggs
whole
albumin**
vitellin**

Factor
6.25
5.55
6.38
6.40
6.37
6.25
6.32
6.12

Plant products
Wheat -whole kernel
Wheat -bran
Wheat -embryo
Wheat -endosperm
Rice
Rye
Barley
Oats
Millet#
Maize (corn)
Sorghum#
Beans
Soya
Castor beans
Beans: adzuki; jack; lima; mung; navy; velvet
Mushrooms*
Chocolate and cocoa*
Yeast*
Coffee*
Nuts
Almond
Brazil
Peanuts (groundnut)
Others (butternuts; cashew; chestnut; coconut;
hazelnut; hickory; pecans; pine nuts; pistachio;
walnuts)#
Seeds (cataloup; cottonseed; flaxseed; hempseed;

5.83
6.31
5.80
5.70
5.95
5.83
5.83
5.83
5.83
6.25
6.25
6.25
5.71
5.3
6.25
4.38
4.74
5.7
5.3
5.18
5.46
5.46
5.30
5.30

39

pumpkin; sesame; sunflower)
* From USDA SR24 documentation. # From Merrill and Watt, 1973 (Merrill, A.L., and B.K. Watt. 1973.
Energy Value of Foods: Basis and Derivation, revised. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook
74). ** From Greenfield and Southgate (2003).

40

References
Burlingame, B. (2004). Fostering quality data in food composition databases: visions for the future.
Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 17, 251-258.
Burlingame, B., Monro J. (1991). Proceedings of the third OCEANIAFOODS Conference. Crop
and Food Research. Auckland. New Zealand.
Bergström, L. (1994). Nutrient Losses and Gains. Statens Livsmedelsverk, Uppsala. Available at
http://www.slv.se/upload/dokument/rapporter/mat_naring/1994_32_Livsmedelsverket_nutrient_l
osses_and_gains.pdf (Accessed May, 2012).
Bognár, A. (2002). Tables of weight yield of food and retention factors of food constituents for the
calculation of nutrition composition of cooked foods (dishes). Bundesforschungsanstalt für
Ernährung, Karlsruhe. Available at
http://www.mri.bund.de/fileadmin/Veroeffentlichungen/Archiv/Schriftenreihe_Berichte/bfe-r-0203.pdf (Accessed June 2012).
Charrondiere, U.R. (2012a). Basic principles for assembling, management and updating of a food
composition database. PowerPoint Presentation. Available at:
ftp://ftp.fao.org/ag/agn/infoods/basic%20principles%20in%20assempling%20mangement%20updati
ng.pdf (Accessed June, 2012).
Charrondiere, U.R. (2012b). Food selection, nomenclature, classification and identification in
databases. PowerPoint Presentation. Available at
ftp://ftp.fao.org/ag/agn/infoods/food%20nomenclature.pdf (Accessed June, 2012).
Charrondiere, U.R. (2012c). Food composition database management systems and interchange.
PowerPoint Presentation. Available at: http://www.fao.org/infoods/presentations_en.stm (Accessed
June, 2012).
Charrondiere, U.R., Burlingame, B., Berman, S., Elmadfa, I. (2011a). Food Composition
Study Guide. Questions and exercises (volume 1) – second revised edition. FAO, Rome.
Available at http://www.fao.org/infoods/publications_en.stm (Accessed June, 2012).
Charrondiere, U.R., Burlingame, B., Berman, S., Elmadfa, I. (2011b). Food Composition
Study Guide. Questions, exercises and answers (volume 2) – second revised edition. FAO, Rome.
Available at http://www.fao.org/infoods/publications_en.stm (Accessed June, 2012).
Charrondiere U.R., Burlingame, B. (2011). Report on the FAO/INFOODS Compilation Tool: A
simple system to manage food composition data. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 24,
711-715.
Codex Alimentarius (2007) Food Labelling. Fifth edition. FAO. Rome. Italy. Avaialble at:
ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/a1390e/a1390e00.pdf (Accessed July, 2007).
EuroFIR (2012a). European Food Information Resource Network
http://www.eurofir.net/food_information/quality_and_standards (Accessed May, 2012).
EuroFIR (2012b). EuroFIR Component Thesaurus. Available at:
http://www.eurofir.net/eurofir_aisbl/products/eurofir_thesauri/component_thesaurus (Accessed
May, 2012).

41

EuroFIR (2012c). Food composition databases
http://www.eurofir.net/eurofir_knowledge/european_databases (Accessed May, 2012).
EuroFIR (2012d). Website on recipe calculation, including yield and retention factors.
http://www.eurofir.org/?q=node/9 (Accessed May, 2012).
EuroFIR (2009). EuroFIR Work package 1.3, Task group 4. Guidelines for quality index attribution
to original data from scientific literature or reports for EuroFIR data interchange. October 2009.
Available at
http://www.eurofir.net/sites/default/files/Deliverables/EuroFIR_Quality_Index_Guidelines.pdf
(Accessed June, 2012).
FAO/INFOODS (2012a). FAO/INFOODS Guidelines on Conversion among different units,
denominators and expressions. Soon available at http://www.fao.org/infoods/projects_en.stm
FAO/INFOODS (2012b). FAO/INFOODS Density Database. Available at
http://www.fao.org/infoods/projects_en.stm (AccessedOcotber, 2012).
FAO/INFOODS (2011). FAO/INFOODS Guidelines of Food Matching. Version 1.1. FAO, Rome.
Available at http://www.fao.org/infoods/projects_en.stm (Accessed June, 2012).
FAO (2003). Food energy- methods of analysis and conversion factors. FAO, Rome. Available at
http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/006/Y5022E/Y5022E00.HTM (Accessed June, 2012).
Finke, M.D. (2007). Estimate of chitin in raw whole insects. Zoo Biology, 26(2), 105-115.
FoodCase (2012). Available at: http://www.foodcase.ethz.ch/index_EN (Accessed June, 2012).
Food Standards Agency (2002). McCance and Widdowson’s. The Composition of Foods integrated
dataset (CoFIDS). Sixth summary edition. Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry. Available at
http://tna.europarchive.org/20110116113217/http://www.food.gov.uk/science/dietarysurveys/diet
surveys/(Accessed June, 2012).
Greenfield, H., Southgate, D.A.T. (2003). Food composition data – production, management and
use. FAO, Rome. Available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/008/y4705e/y4705e00.pdf (Accessed
June, 2012).
Haytowitz, D.B., Lemar, L.E., Pehrsson, P.R. (2009). USDA’s Nutrient Databank System – A tool
for handling data from diverse sources. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 22, 433–441.
Holden, J.M., Bhagwat, S.A., Patterson, K.Y. (2002). Development of a multi-nutrient data quality
evaluation system. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 15(4), 339–348.
INFOODS (2012a). The International Network of Food Data Systems. Available at
http://www.fao.org/infoods/index_en.stm (Accessed May, 2012).
INFOODS (2012b). Tagnames for components. Available at
http://www.fao.org/infoods/tagnames_en.stm (Accessed May, 2012).
Ireland, J., Møller, A. (2000). Review of International Food Classification Description. Journal of
Food Composition and Analysis, 13, 529-538.

42

Jones, D.B. (1941). Factors for Converting Percentages of Nitrogen in Foods and Feeds into
Percentages of Protein. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Circular No. 183, Slightly revised edition
1941 (Original version 1931).
Klensin, J.C. (1992). INFOODS Food Composition Data Interchange Handbook. United Nations
University, Tokyo. Available at
http://archive.unu.edu/unupress/unupbooks/80774e/80774E00.htm#Contents (Accessed June,
2012).
Klensin, J.C., Feskanich, D., Lin, V., Truswell, A.S., Southgate, D.A.T. (1989). Identification of
Food Components for INFOODS Data Interchange. United Nations University, Tokyo, 1989.
Available at: ftp://ftp.fao.org/es/esn/infoods/Klensinetal1989Identificationoffoodcomponents.pdf
(Accessed May, 2012).
LanguaL (2012) The International Framework for Food Description. Available at
http://www.langual.org/ (Accessed June 2012).
Merrill A.L., Watt, B.K. (1973). Energy value of foods, basis and derivation. Human Nutrition
Research Branch. Agriculture Research Service. United States Department of Agriculture.
Agriculture Handbook No.74. Available at
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/Data/Classics/ah74.pdf (Accessed May, 2012).
Murphy, E.W., P.E. Criner, and B.C. Gray. 1975. Comparison of methods for determining
retentions of nutrients in cooked foods. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry 23:1153.
Pennington, J.A.T. (2008). Applications of food composition data: Data sources and considerations
for use. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 21, S3–S12.
Pennington, J.A.T (1996). Issues of food description. Food Chemistry, 57(1), 145-148.
Rand, W.M., Pennington, J.A.T., Murphy, S.P., Klensin, J.C. (1991). Compiling Data for Food
Composition Data Bases. United Nations University Press, Tokyo, Japan.
Schakel, S.F., Buzzard, I.M., Gebhardt, S.E. (1997). Procedures for Estimating Nutrient Values for
Food Composition Databases. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 10, 102-114.
Truswell, A.S., Bateson, D.J., Madafiglio, K.C., Pennington, J.A.T., Rand, W.R., Klensin, J.C.
(1991). INFOODS Guidelines for Describing Foods: A Systematic Approach to Describing Foods to
Facilitate International Exchange of Food Composition Data. Journal of Food Composition and
Analysis, 4, 18–38.
USDA (2011). USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 24.
Available at http://www.ars.usda.gov/services/docs.htm?docid=8964 (Accessed May, 2012).
USDA (2007). Table of Nutrient Retention Factors, Release 6 Available at
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/Data/retn6/retn06.pdf (Accessed May, 2012).
USDA (1975). Agriculture Handbook No. 102. Food Yields Summarized by Different Stages of
Preparation. USDA Agricultural Research Service, Washington, D.C. Available at
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/Data/Classics/ah102.pdf (Accessed May, 2012).

43

Westenbrink, S., Oseredczuk, M., Castanheira, I. (2009). Food composition databases: The EuroFIR
approach to develop tools to assure the quality of the data compilation process Food Chemistry, 113,
759 -767.
Additional literature
Burlingame, B., Monro J. (1991). Proceedings of the third OCEANIAFOODS Conference. Crop
and Food Research. Auckland, New Zealand.
Buzzard, I.M., Schakel, S.F., Ditter-Johnson, J. (1993). Quality Control in the Use of Food and
Nutrient Databases for Epidemiologic Studies. In: Proceedings of the First International Food Data
Base Conference held in Sydney, Australia, 22–24 September. Heather Greenfield and FAO. First
edition. (Available at: ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/008/af282e/af282e00.pdf (Accessed May, 2012).
Castanheira, I., Roe, M., Westenbrink, S., J., Møller, A., Salvini, S., Beernaert, H., Oseredczuk, M.,
Calhau, M.A. (2009) Establishing quality management systems for European food composition
databases, Food Chemistry, 113 (3), 776-780.
Schlotke, F., Becker, W., Ireland, J., Møller, A., Ovaskainen, M.-L., Monspart, J., Unwin, I. (2000).
EUROFOODS recommendations for food composition database management and data interchange.
Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 13 (4), 709-744.

44

